# Snakemake pipeline to run [`euroformix`](https://github.com/oyvble/euroformix)

This snakemake pipeline uses functions from the R package [`euroformix`](https://github.com/oyvble/euroformix) to calculate the likelihood that short tandem repeat (STR) profiles of human blood from freshly fed mosquitoes (the "evidence") are from a given person (the "reference"). It outputs a csv with the log10 likelihood ratio (log10LR) for each mosquito-human pair, where the numerator is the likelihood that the person was bitten by the mosquito and the denominator is the likelihood that someone else was bitten by the mosquito. 

There are 2 input csv files that are required to run the pipeline:
1. Human STR profiles (the "reference").
1. Mosquito STR profiles (the "evidence").

It can also optionally take a csv file of the human population allele frequencies. If this file is not included, population allele frequencies will be computed from teh human STR profiles. 

The output is a dataframe of log10LRs for each mosquito-human pair.  

See below for more information about the format of the input and output files. 

## More information about euroformix
- Manuscript: [EuroForMix: An open source software based on a continuous model to evaluate STR DNA profiles from a mixture of contributors with artefacts](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26720812/)
- [GitHub](https://github.com/oyvble/euroformix)
- [Website that explains GUI](http://www.euroformix.com/)

## Data requirements

Formats for each dataset required for this pipeline are shown below.

### Human STR profiles (the "reference")

The human reference STR profiles should be supplied in a csv file with one row per allele for each person and marker. The column headings should be formmated as shown in the example rows below:

|SampleName|Marker|Allele|
|:---:|:---:|:---:|
|Person_1|TH01|6|
|Person_1|TH01|8|
|Person_1|D21S11|29|
|Person_1|D21S11|30|

### Mosquito STR profiles (the "evidence")

The mosquito STR profiles (evidence samples) should be supplied in a csv file with one row per allele for each mosquito and marker. You must also provide the peak height for each allele. The column headings should be formatted as shown in the example rows below:

|SampleName|Marker|Allele|Height|
|:---:|:---:|:---:|:---:|
|Sample_1|TH01|6|4887|
|Sample_1|TH01|9|4662|

### Population allele frequency (optional)

Population frequencies for each allele at each locus can be supplied in a csv file. If no csv file is provided, population allele frequencies will be computed from the human STR profiles. 

If you would like to input population allele frequencies, the .csv file should contain one column for each STR marker and one row for each allele. The alleles should be listed in a column titled "Allele". The first two rows of an example table with the loci from the Promega Geneprint10 kit is shown below:

| Allele | TH01 | D21S11 | D5S818 | D13S317 | D7S820 | D16S539 | CSF1PO | AMEL | vWA | TPOX |
|:------:|:----:|:------:|:------:|:-------:|:------:|:------:|:----:|:---:|:----:|:---:|
|6|0.206957| | | | | | | | |0.098276|
|8|0.250435| |0.06117|0.021053|0.187716|0.033304|0.042205| | |0.24569|


## Installing euroformix

First, [download miniconda](https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/miniconda.html) for linux if you don't already have it:
```
wget https://repo.anaconda.com/miniconda/Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh
bash Miniconda3-latest-MacOSX-x86_64.sh
```

Next, run these commands to download and install the pipeline and the euroformix R package (you only have to do all this once):
```
git clone https://github.com/duke-malaria-collaboratory/run_euroformix.git # download this GitHub repository
cd run_euroformix # move into the run_euroformix directory
mamba env create -f config/environment/euroformix.yaml # create the euroformix conda environment
conda activate euroformix # activate the euroformix conda environment
Rscript -e "devtools::install_github('https://github.com/oyvble/euroformix.git')" # install euroformix in environment
```

Note that you will have to activate the conda environment each time you open a new terminal:
```
conda activate euroformix
```

## Using the euroformix snakemake pipeline

To run the pipeline on the cluster, you have to modify the following files:
- `scripts/submit_slurm.sbat` (email address)
- `config/slurm/cluster.yaml` (email address)
- `config/config.yaml` (paths to input data; other parameters such as the kit if needed)

To check to see if everything is working okay, first do a "dry-run":
```
conda activate euroformix # be sure you've activated the environment! 
snakemake -n # dry-run
```

If this runs successfully, then run:
```
sbatch scripts/submit_slurm.sbat # submit the job to the cluster
```

See below for more information on snakemake.

## Output files

The main output is a csv file containing the log10LR for each mosquito-human pair. By default, this output is stored in `output/log10LRs.csv`. 

Intermediate data files generated by the pipeline are stored in `output/data`. These include formatted input files, a file with human population allele frequencies (calculated from the human STR profiles), and rds files with the data shaped in the format required for `euroformix`. 

## More details about the pipeline

The pipline executes the following steps:

1. Calculates human population allele frequencies and the minimum number of contributors for each mosquito (evidence).
1. Calculates log10 likelihood ratios (log10LRs) for each mosquito using the `contLikSearch` function from `euroformix`. Degradation is modeled, but forward and backward stutter are not. 
1. Identifies the likely human contributors to each mosquito (WORK IN PROGRESS). 

## Learning more about snakemake

Benefits of snakemake
- Your analysis is reproducible.
- You don't have to re-perform computationally intensive tasks early in the pipeline to change downstream analyses or figures.
- You can easily combine shell, R, Python, etc. scritps into one pipeline.
- You can easily share your pipeline with others.
- You can submit a single slurm job and snakemake handles submitting the rest of your jobs for you.

Useful links to learn more about snakemake
- [Snakemake documentation](https://snakemake.readthedocs.io/en/stable/)
- [Short overview](https://slides.com/johanneskoester/snakemake-short#/)
- [More detailed overview](https://slides.com/johanneskoester/snakemake-tutorial#/)
